[H1]Abortion Pills, Coercion, and Abuse

COMMENTARY Life

[H1]Abortion Pills, Coercion, and Abuse

Sep 23, 2025 12 min read

Copied

Across the country, men coerce or even force pregnant women to take pills that induce an abortion.

Some of these use abortion pills to cover up abuse.

We have no way to know the full scope of this problem.

But we do know that this problem will get worse – not better – if pro-abortion policymakers continue to champion the abortion industry at the expense of women’s health and safety.

The Biden administration recently gutted safety protocols on dangerous abortion drugs that had stood for more than 20 years.

No longer must a doctor see a woman in-person to rule out life-threatening risks or accurately date a pregnancy.

Now the Food and Drug Administration endorses telemedicine abortion and abortion pill-by-mail.

These drugs hurt women and end the lives of thousands of unborn children every year.

But the abortion industry isn’t stopping here.

The goal isn’t just to treat abortion drugs like any other prescription drug.

It’s to make abortion pills available over-the-counter.

Coerced and forced abortions are already happening.

And every time safety protocols are degraded, it becomes easier for an unsupportive partner, abuser, or trafficker to harm women, girls, and unborn children.

Stories like the ones below will become more common unless policymakers act to stop these tragedies.

[H2]Real-life Cases

Heritage has compiled publicly documented cases related to abortion pill abuse and coercion.

The perpetrators used similar methods: secretly  crushing the pill into food and drink, sneakily  swapping  the pill for a different drug, or  coercing the victim into taking the pill with and sometimes without her knowledge.

[H3]Crushed into Food or Drink

[H4]Texas 2025

In 2025, Justin Anthony Banta was taken into custody to be charged with capital murder and tampering with evidence.

Upon learning she was pregnant, Banta’s girlfriend wanted to keep her child but Banta suggested an abortion.

Her child had a strong heartbeat and appeared healthy on an ultrasound when she was about six weeks pregnant in October 2024.

Banta allegedly ordered abortion pills online and crushed the pills into her coffee later that day without her knowledge.

Several days later she went to an emergency room after experiencing heavy bleeding, discovering that her unborn child was dead.

The county sheriff’s office also alleges that Banta remotely reset his phone, which had been seized as evidence, “deleting crucial evidence related to the case."

In early 2025, Christopher Cooprider ’s girlfriend became pregnant with a baby girl.

According to a wrongful death  complaint, Cooprider consistently pressured her to have an abortion, but his girlfriend refused.

Ignoring her repeated objections, Cooprider obtained pills from AidAccess—a website operated by a Dutch doctor, Rebecca Gomperts, who illegally ships pills into the United States from international sources.

Text messages in the complaint show him becoming increasingly hostile, and his girlfriend eventually told him to stop texting and harassing her.

Eventually Cooprider invited his girlfriend over for a “trust building night.” His girlfriend was about eight weeks pregnant.

He laced her hot chocolate with the abortion pills he purchased from AidAccess.

According to the complaint, she started cramping and hemorrhaging withing 30 minutes.

She scrambled to arrange childcare so Cooprider could take her to the emergency room, but instead he abandoned her and stopped responding to calls and texts.

When his girlfriend finally made her way to the ER, it was too late for her baby.

[H4]Texas 2024

In 2022, Mason Herring was charged with assaulting a pregnant woman and assault-forced induction after repeatedly slipping an abortion drug into his wife’s beverages to forcibly abort their unborn child.

She went to the hospital with severe cramping and bleeding.

She eventually gave birth to her baby prematurely.

The forced induction charge was downgraded to injury to a child.

In 2024 Herring was sentenced to 180 days in prison and 10 years probation.

[H4]Wisconsin 2022

Jeffrey Smith was sentenced to  five years  in prison for attempted first degree homicide of an unborn child.

He  crushed up  an abortion pill and put it in his girlfriend’s water bottle.

She was about 20 weeks pregnant at the time.

[H4]Virginia 2018

Doctor  Sikander Imran, a doctor, was  sentenced  to three years in prison for fetal homicide.

He spiked his girlfriend’s tea with an abortion pill.

She was 17 weeks pregnant at the time.

[H4]Kansas 2015

Scott Bollig  was sentenced to nearly 10 years in prison for conspiracy to commit intentional first degree murder for crushing an abortion pill into his girlfriend’s pancakes.

She was about 8-10 weeks pregnant when she lost her child.

[H4]Wisconsin 2007

Manishkumar Patel was sentenced to 22 years in prison for first-degree intentional homicide after trying to trick his girlfriend into drinking a smoothie spiked with a crushed abortion pill.

[H3]Swapped Pills

[H4]Massachusetts 2024

Robert Kawada “was charged  with poisoning, assault and battery with a dangerous weapon on a pregnant person and assault and battery on a household or family member.” Kawada allegedly gave his girlfriend iron and vitamin pills, however at least one pill was actually misoprostol.

The victim lost the pregnancy after ingesting the drugs.

[H4]Florida 2014

John Weldon was  sentenced  to 14 years in prison after tricking his girlfriend into taking an abortion pill.

She was about 7 weeks pregnant at the time.

He forged the signature of his father – a fertility doctor – on a prescription and swapped the abortion pills into a bottled labeled as an antibiotic.

[H3]Coerced Consumption and Abuse

[H4]Illinois 2025

In August of 2025, Emerson Evans was arrested and charged with two counts of intentional homicide of an unborn child.

He   allegedly  put abortion pills in his girlfriend’s vagina without her knowledge or consent.

His girlfriend was approximately 7 weeks pregnant at the time.

Evans claimed he bought mifepristone pills for $50 “from a girl on campus.” The victim told police that Evans wanted her to have an abortion but she did not.

Evans  reportedly  told police that he “made the decision for her.”

[H4]Washington 2024

David Coots, a nurse practitioner, was charged with assault, third degree rape, and witness tampering after allegedly forcing a misoprostol pill into a woman’s vagina during sexual intercourse.

Coots had led the woman to believe that he was excited about her pregnancy.

Coots claimed that he prescribed the misoprostol for himself.

The victim was suspicious and sought emergency care, at which point more misoprostol was discovered inside her.

After days of bleeding and stomach pain, she was no longer pregnant.

In summer 2025 Coots pleaded guilty to both second and fourth-degree assault as well as tampering with a witness.

He was  sentenced  to one year and one day in prison and may not contact the victim for 10 years.

[H4]Louisiana 2024

New York abortionist Dr.

Margaret Carpenter, along with a Louisiana woman, were indicted by a Louisiana grand jury for violating the state’s law prohibiting abortion pills.

According to the district attorney, the Louisiana woman obtained the pills via Dr.

Carpenter and told her pregnant daughter, a minor, that “she had to take the pill or else.” The young girl reportedly ended up in the emergency room after suffering significant bleeding.

She had reportedly been planning a gender reveal party for her child, which indicates that she desired to keep her baby.

Instead she was allegedly coerced to take have an abortion she didn’t want with pills recklessly prescribed by a doctor who had reportedly never even evaluated her or spoken with her.

[H4]Florida 2023

Haley Raborn was charged with solicitation and attempted murder on an unborn child by injury to the mother, and tampering with/fabricating physical evidence.

Raborn allegedly attempted to have the ex-fiance of the victim kill his 11-week old unborn child with an abortion pill.

Instead, the ex-fiance turned the pill over to law enforcement.

Raborn claimed that she got the pill from an online telemedicine doctor, which is illegal under Florida law.

[H4]Louisiana 2023

Rosalie Markezich found out she was pregnant and wanted to keep her child.

Her boyfriend, originally supportive, decided he did not want her to have their child and  coerced  her to have an abortion she didn’t want.

Rosalie is now attempting to  intervene  in a case challenging the Biden FDA’s reckless decision to do away with the very safeguards that, had they been in place, could have protected Rosalie and her baby.

In a sworn  declaration, Rosalie described how her boyfriend’s sister advised him how to order drugs from an online pharmacy.

He filled out a form online using her information; the only interaction Rosalie had with a medical provider was to send payment for the drugs, which were shipped from California via USPS.

Her boyfriend, who she says had anger issues and a criminal record, repeatedly pressured her to take the drugs.

Rosalie says she had previously suffered domestic abuse, and was terrified when her boyfriend had her cornered in a car alone, shouting at her.

She feared for her safety and says she took the drugs in front of him to pacify him, and planned to throw them up as soon as possible.

She wasn’t able to get away from him in time, and to this day Rosalie says she grieves for the child she was forced to abort and is haunted by the trauma.

[H4]California 2022

Jagmeet Sandhu  was sentenced to a year in jail for involuntary manslaughter.

He had held his girlfriend at gunpoint after entering her home while she slept and forced her to take abortion pills, killing her child.

She was about 12 weeks pregnant at the time.

[H4]Nebraska 2021

Ronald Powell, a high school security guard, was accused of sexually abusing a 15-year old student over the course of several years.

And a result, the student became pregnant.

According to court records he posed as her father at Planned Parenthood, where she had a chemical abortion.

[H4]Connecticut 2016

Sage Lanza, an adult male, had a sexual relationship with a 14-year old victim who became pregnant.

He pressured her to have an abortion and made an appointment for her at Planned Parenthood.

When she was about two months pregnant, he and his father took her to Planned Parenthood for a chemical abortion.

Connecticut does not have parental notification or consent laws for minors seeking an abortion.

[H4]New York 2015

Joshua Woodward was sentenced to nine years in prison for attempted murder after giving a woman abortion drugs without her knowledge during a sexual encounter.

She had previously refused his request that she have an abortion.

The woman was 13 weeks pregnant at the time; Woodward had tried to slip her the drug twice before his third attempt was successful.

This list was first published on December 1, 2023 and cases are updated as needed.

The most recent update was September 23, 2025.

[H2]What to do

Women and girls deserve better.

Policymakers at the state and federal level must act – but how?

For starters, they should:

Prohibit telemedicine and mail-order abortions,
Strengthen informed consent requirements,
Strengthen or enact laws regarding abortion coercion,
Strengthen or enact parental consent laws for minors, and
Strengthen or laws regarding forced abortion which seek justice for both victims – unborn children and their mothers.

With Roe v.

Wade in the dustbin of history, abortion pills are the abortion industry’s answer to undermine pro-life progress.

Americans should know that removing commonsense safety protocols will mean even more women and girls will face abuse and coercion.

No matter what you think about abortion, everyone should agree that nobody should be coerced or forced to have an abortion against her will.

At every level of government, policy should protect women, girls, and unborn children – not abusers.

[H2]Additional Resources

Dangerous Abortion Drugs Are a Threat to Health and Safety.

What Now?

Chemical Abortion: A Review
Biden Administration Sanctions Mail-Order Abortion.

Here’s How the Move Endangers Women
Biden, FDA Move to Turn Local Pharmacies Into Abortion Clinics

Collections

[H2]Chemical Abortion

commentary

[H3]Why Do-It-Yourself Abortion Pills Are So Dangerous

Nov 26, 2024 4 min read

report

[H3]States May Restrict Abortion Drugs

Nov 26, 2024 About an hour read

[H2]Heritage Offers

[H4]Activate your 2025 Membership

By activating your membership you'll become part of a committed group of fellow patriots who stand for America's Founding principles.

[H4]The Heritage Guide to the Constitution

Receive a clause-by-clause analysis of the Constitution with input from more than 100 scholars and legal experts.

[H4]American Founders

In this FREE, extensive eBook, you will learn about how our Founders used intellect, prudence, and courage to create the greatest nation in the world.

More on This Issue

[H2]Life

COMMENTARY 2 min read

Why the Department of Veterans Affairs Shouldn’t Be Funding Abortion

BACKGROUNDER 30 min read

A Pro-Life Agenda for the 119th Congress and the Administration

COMMENTARY 1 min read

Want Babies?

Treat Infertility’s Root Causes