Commentary
Donald Trump’s digital mercantilism
Tom Wheeler
Tom Wheeler
Visiting Fellow
-
Governance Studies
,
Center for Technology Innovation (CTI)
October 8, 2025
American tech companies have largely avoided meaningful regulatory oversight in the U.S. Now, President Trump has pledged to “stand up” to countries that “attack” them.
The pledge comes as the European Union is seeking to reassert corporate accountability over Big Tech companies.
This use of political power to protect favored companies can be seen as a modern-day version of mercantilism.
President Donald Trump hosts dinner with US tech leaders in the State Dining Room of the White House on September 4, 2025. Credit: Will Oliver/POOL
7 min read
Bluesky Streamline Icon: https://streamlinehq.com
Bluesky
Print
President Donald Trump appears to be trying to recreate 17th-century
mercantilism for the 21st-century
digital economy. Back in August, responding to European regulations that expect responsible behavior by the dominant digital companies, he
wrote on Truth Social
, “As the President of the United States, I will stand up to Countries that attack our incredible American Tech Companies.”
Centuries ago, European governments protected favored firms operating abroad. As this
Truth Social
post illustrates, the dominant American digital companies—Big Tech—have been similarly successful in cultivating President Trump to protect them from the regulatory expectations of other nations, especially Europe.
An August 25, 2025, post from President Donald Trump on Truth Social.
Digital mercantilism
From the 16
th
through the 18
th
century, European nations used tariffs, monopolies, and political power to shield favored companies. This policy, called mercantilism, created winner-take-all opportunities for the politically privileged.
Mercantilism once protected companies from competition. Trump’s digital mercantilism protects a business model.
The dominant digital platforms of the internet became
monumentally profitable
in part by avoiding costs associated with responsible behaviors such as protecting user privacy, accountability for the content they distribute, and avoiding anticompetitive behavior. Economists call this “
externalization
”—the shifting of burdens that should be the responsibility of a company to users and society.
When President Trump speaks of “Digital Services Legislation,” he is referring to the EU’s Digital Services Act (DSA) and the expectations it establishes for platform-delivered content. The expression “Digital Markets Regulation” refers to the Digital Markets Act (DMA), designed to protect competition in online markets. Apparently, he sees requiring dominant companies to be accountable to the public interest as an act “designed to harm, or discriminate against American Technology.”
What President Trump leaves out
President Trump’s post is missing any recognition of the interests of American citizens, focusing instead on the corporations whose practices have harmed those citizens.
Because of the
absence of American regulatory oversight
, these companies have, among other things, engaged in
monopolistic behaviors
, avoided
responsibility to the truth
in what they distribute, designed their products to be
addictive
, and violated the personal
privacy
of their users—all for the purpose of expanding profits.
The EU has attempted to rebalance the market by requiring dominant companies to accept responsibilities they have worked to avoid. On the other hand, the president of the United States seeks to protect the magnification of Big Tech’s profits through the reduction of its responsibilities.
This approach marks a sharp departure from the U.S. government’s traditional treatment of American industry.
Automobile manufacturers
, for instance, must bear the costs associated with producing a safe product, such as installing airbags, seatbelts, or emission controls.
In contrast, Big Tech has been able to sidestep the costs of addressing its own safety problems, such as misinformation, addictive use by young people, and the adverse consequences of creating an information ecosystem solely designed to maximize advertising revenue.
In this new form of mercantilism, the president is
threatening
“substantial additional Tariffs” on European exports to the U.S. so that Big Tech companies may continue to avoid costs they should have already been internalizing as a part of being good corporate citizens.
When companies make their own rules
Since the dawn of the digital era,
Congress has largely avoided
establishing expectations of responsibility for online services. In the absence of such standards, companies have been able to make their own rules and prioritize profits over accountability.
The Silicon Valley mantra “
move fast and break things
” has served as a roadmap in this sense. To “move fast” was essential; new behaviors had to become ingrained before anyone caught on to what was really being done. The “things” to be broken, of course, were the norms and standards of marketplace behavior that previously provided stability.
Such a do-it-quick-and-the-consequences-be-damned attitude proved highly profitable. Yet, because it also drove innovation and produced impacts that were hard to foresee, American policymakers turned a
blind eye to its consequences
.
Over time, the small and innovative startups became giants, amassing economic and political power. By the time everyone was using the new platforms and the “consequences-be-damned” results became visible, the need for meaningful oversight manifested; however, the companies were powerful enough to resist the expectations of responsibility.
What worked in Washington, however, did not work in Brussels. With the passage of the DMA and DSA, EU institutions established guardrails that the dominant digital companies had previously been able to ignore.
New regulatory model
What makes the EU’s approach especially significant is its largely unrecognized
break with traditional regulation
. Industrial-era regulation relied on the micromanagement of corporate activities to achieve public interest goals. The DSA and DMA, however, create a different paradigm
that sets behavioral expectations for the companies to achieve on their own terms.
The DSA, for instance,
mandates
that companies must incorporate content moderation and transparency into their operational decisions. Unlike traditional regulation, the law does not specify how these goals must be met, but rather mandates that they be achieved in a meaningful manner. It is then up to the company to self-certify its compliance and face penalties if it falls short.
Similarly, the DMA
establishes the expectation
of self-executing compliance without prescribing specific corporate behavior. Its focus is on fostering marketplace choice by ensuring that competitors have a genuine opportunity to contest for the market. Companies are then required to certify how their practices promote contestability and fairness.
The European oversight that President Trump seeks to punish is more nuanced than the traditional, blunt-force regulatory micromanagement model invented in the United States during the industrial period. Instead of “we will tell you how to run your business,” it’s now “we will identify the desired public interest and expect you to achieve it.”
Sovereignty
The EU’s digital regulations are an exercise of sovereignty. Both the U.S. and EU nations regularly exercise such sovereignty over goods and services offered within their borders. American
car makers
,
cosmetics companies
,
medical device companies
,
toy manufacturers
,
aircraft manufacturers
, and more must obey rules established by the EU before they can sell their goods in that market. Similarly, European automobiles must meet American
safety
and
emission
standards. Imported food products must comply with the regulations of the
Department of Agriculture
and the
Food and Drug Administration
.
Digital goods are no exception. When, for instance, the president dictates conditions for
TikTok to operate in the U.S
., he exercises national sovereignty over a digital product. The EU is behaving similarly with the DMA and DSA.
Despite these parallels—and decades of mutually beneficial trade—Donald Trump is demanding the EU to “Show respect to America and our amazing Tech Companies” and to “end, and end NOW!” its digital market regulations. It is a 21st-century
reprise of mercantilism, with the government as the enforcer on behalf of its most powerful corporations.
“They jokingly call me the ‘president of Europe,’” Donald Trump
said in the Oval Office
after meeting with assembled European leaders on August 26. What was meant as bravado is a revealing self-portrait of a transactional president. This time, the president seeks to assert dominion over the regulatory sovereignty of other nations in order to shield the profits of Big Tech.
Related Content
Will Donald Trump make European tech great again?
Technology Policy & Regulation
Will Donald Trump make European tech great again?
Tom Wheeler
May 16, 2025
Crossing the regulatory Rubicon: The future of digital regulation is being defined in Europe
Technology Policy & Regulation
Crossing the regulatory Rubicon: The future of digital regulation is being defined in Europe
Tom Wheeler
June 7, 2024
Trump’s tech tariffs: From protecting production to protecting Big Tech’s profits
U.S. Trade Policy
Trump’s tech tariffs: From protecting production to protecting Big Tech’s profits
Tom Wheeler
March 10, 2025
Author
Tom Wheeler
Visiting Fellow
-
Governance Studies
,
Center for Technology Innovation (CTI)
@tewheels
The Brookings Institution is committed to quality, independence, and impact.
We are supported by a
diverse array of funders
. In line with our
values and policies
, each Brookings publication represents the sole views of its author(s).
More On
Business & Workforce
Sub-Topics
Corporations
Technology & Information
Sub-Topics
Internet & Telecommunications
Privacy
Social Media
Technology Policy & Regulation
U.S. Economy
Sub-Topics
Regulatory Policy
U.S. Government & Politics
Sub-Topics
Presidency
North America
Sub-Topics
U.S. States and Territories
Program
Governance Studies
Region
North America
U.S. States and Territories
Center
Center for Technology Innovation (CTI)
We should all be Luddites
Technology & Information
We should all be Luddites
Courtney C. Radsch
October 6, 2025
Recommendations for responsible use of AI in financial services
Banking & Finance
Recommendations for responsible use of AI in financial services
Nicol Turner Lee
September 23, 2025
Shaping the future of AI through responsible innovation
Artificial Intelligence
Shaping the future of AI through responsible innovation
Nicol Turner Lee
September 23, 2025