[H1]Gender Activists Are Aiming to Cut Georgia Parents Out

COMMENTARY Gender

[H1]Gender Activists Are Aiming to Cut Georgia Parents Out

Oct 21, 2024 2 min read

joxxxxjo/Getty Images

[H3]Key Takeaways

Parents in Georgia are in danger of getting squeezed out, and they should be concerned.

These gender policies have nothing to do with curriculum or administration, areas where schools are given wide latitude.

The administration has locked arms with activists to pursue something likely to change a student’s life trajectory, whether parents like it or not.

Copied

If gender activists have their way, every school district in America will have policies that cater to students’ feelings about gender identity and exclude parents from even finding out.

More than 11.5 million students already attend 20,000 schools with these policies.

If the Biden administration had its way, Georgia schools would soon join them.

Look at a few typical policies from Virginia.

The  Arlington County Public School policy  defines gender identity as “one’s sense of self as male, female, or an alternative gender.” These policies assume that every student, regardless of age, has this “sense of self” and require that any expression of it be taken at face value, treated as conclusive, and drive a host of other policies.

The  Chesapeake Public Schools  policy requires access to facilities, such as bathrooms and locker rooms, “that correspond to a student’s gender identity.” Students may “participate in any co-curricular or extracurricular activity,” dress, and have the “right to be addressed in class and in the school building” consistent with their gender identity.

The First Amendment or privacy rights of other students and teachers be hanged.

The  Fairfax County Public Schools  policy provides that students be assigned “to a room consistent with the student’s gender identity” during activities that require “students to be accommodated overnight.” No word on what to do about students uncomfortable with being paired with an opposite-sex roommate.

The  Hampton City Schools policy  states that it has “no affirmative legal duty to inform parents of the student’s gender identity choice.” In other words, parents are shut out unless the student gives permission.

The upshot of these policies is that Johnny may need his parents’ permission to go to the zoo with his class, but the parents often need Johnny’s permission to know about him undressing in the girls’ locker room.

Before you say this won’t happen in Georgia, consider this.

Title IX is the federal law prohibiting sex discrimination in educational programs that receive federal financial assistance.

That’s almost every public school (and many private ones) in America.

Title IX has opened up incredible opportunities for women and girls.

The Department of Education recently released a mammoth “rule” that redefines “sex” to include gender identity.

There’s no way Congress meant to prohibit discrimination based on a “sense of self as … an alternative gender” when it enacted Title IX in 1972.

Congress said sex, and Congress meant sex — the objective distinction between male and female.

If Congress wanted to include the radically different concept of gender identity, Congress could do so.

It hasn’t.

As civics teachers in schools across the country should still be explaining, the legislative branch, not the executive branch, makes the law.

Here’s why this matters for Georgia schools.

The federal government provides billions in education aid to states and conditions that cashflow on compliance with laws such as Title IX.

So, pressure to cave in and jump on the gender identity bandwagon is coming from the gender activists and the feds.

Parents in Georgia are in danger of getting squeezed out, and they should be concerned.

These gender policies have nothing to do with curriculum or administration, areas where schools are given wide latitude.

Instead, they have everything to do with matters at the heart of family relationships and parents’ right to direct the upbringing of their children.

That job is hard enough without schools catering to their child’s latest feelings about being a boy or a girl and keeping them in the dark about such potentially life-changing developments.

The administration has locked arms with activists to pursue something likely to change a student’s life trajectory, whether parents like it or not.

They are coming after schools in Georgia, too.

[H2]Heritage Offers

[H4]Activate your 2025 Membership

By activating your membership you'll become part of a committed group of fellow patriots who stand for America's Founding principles.

[H4]The Heritage Guide to the Constitution

Receive a clause-by-clause analysis of the Constitution with input from more than 100 scholars and legal experts.

[H4]American Founders

In this FREE, extensive eBook, you will learn about how our Founders used intellect, prudence, and courage to create the greatest nation in the world.

More on This Issue

[H2]Gender

COMMENTARY 3 min read

Patients Treated Better Because of Doctors’ Skill, Not Gender Identity

COMMENTARY 4 min read

Uber’s New “Women Preferences” Program Violates Civil Rights Law

FACTSHEET 9 min read

States Must Refuse to Define “Abuse” as Raising Children According to Their Sex