Also in today’s edition of ‘Regular Order’ for October 10, 2025:
Senate finally approves major defense policy bill.
Dems hail the words of Marjorie Taylor Greene.
A long holiday weekend for Senators - during a shutdown.
CITIES.
In the first votes in Congress about President Trump’s push to send U.S. soldiers into various cities - the U.S. Senate last night rejected a pair of plans from Democrats to limit those National Guard deployments.   Only one GOP Senator went against the White House, as Senate Republicans strongly backed Trump’s use of the Guard to boost law enforcement.
GOP.
“President Trump has proven it can be effective,” argued Sen. Kevin Cramer (R-ND).  “Just because you don’t like the current President is not a reason to make dramatic changes to the laws to restrict him from doing the very thing he promised he’d do.”
DEMS.
On the Senate floor, Democrats quoted the Republican Governor of Oklahoma, Kevin Stitt, who told the New York Times yesterday that he opposed Trump’s move to send National Guard troops from outside states to Chicago.
BOOMER SOONER.
“Oklahomans would lose their mind if (Governor) Pritzker in Illinois sent troops down to Oklahoma during the Biden administration,” Stitt said, defending federalism and states’ rights.
VOTES.
In two Senate votes, only GOP Sen. Bill Cassidy (R-LA) broke ranks with the White House.  The Louisiana Republican voted to block National Guard deployments to another state - if local officials there objected.
ROLL CALL.
That amendment was defeated on a vote of 50-47.  A second plan to limit National Guard help for civilian law enforcement was defeated 52-46.
COURT.
The Senate votes came a few hours after a federal judge issued a 2-week restraining order against any deployment of National Guard troops to Illinois.  The judge said she found no evidence that there was a threat of any ‘rebellion’ in Illinois which would require federal troops to suppress.
LAND OF LINCOLN.
“The President ignored the pleas from elected officials across Illinois that these deployments were unnecessary and unwanted,” said Sen. Dick Durbin (D-IL).
PORTLAND.
That debate came as Oregon’s two Senators took to the floor on Thursday to blast the Trump Administration over its moves to send National Guard troops and federal agents into Portland.  “The notion that my hometown is somehow a war zone in need of saving is a fantasy made up by Donald Trump,” said Sen. Ron Wyden (D-OR).
ON THE GROUND
.  Wyden praised recent federal court rulings which questioned the statements of federal officials about what’s really happening in Portland.  “My hometown is a peaceful city,” said Wyden, who accused Trump of more sinister plans.   “Inciting violence is clearly Trump’s intent.”
PROTEST.
Following Wyden, Sen. Jeff Merkley (D-OR) criticized the actions of federal agents in dealing with protesters in Chicago.  Merkley showed pictures of a Presbyterian minister standing in front of an ICE facility who was suddenly shot in the head with pepper balls by federal agents standing on the roof.
MERKLEY.
“This is an extraordinarily dangerous moment in which an authoritarian President is proceeding to attack due process, to attack freedom of speech,” Merkley said on the Senate floor.
SHOW ME.
Trump backers see it much differently.  “Antifa radicals have launched a violent offensive against ICE agents, facilities, and the law enforcement officers protecting them,” claimed Sen. Eric Schmitt (R-MO).
MASKED AGENTS.
The Senate also rejected a third amendment from Democrats, which sought to require federal law enforcement officers to wear ID’s - instead of being masked, armed, and nameless.  That was defeated on a vote of 50-47.
PENTAGON.
All of those votes came amid a rare bit of bipartisan action on Capitol Hill, as the Senate broke a 5-week logjam on a major defense policy bill which had been stuck on the Senate floor since Labor Day.  After finally striking a deal to vote on a series of amendments, the Senate passed the National Defense Authorization Act by a vote of 77 to 20.
MILITARY.
“This is what collaborative, bipartisan legislation looks like,” said Sen. Roger Wicker (R-MS), the chair of the Senate Armed Services Committee.  Wicker spent weeks working behind the scenes to forge a final deal.  He will now lead negotiations with the House.
NDAA.
“We have built a strong, bipartisan National Defense Authorization Act,” Wicker said on the Senate floor.  “It’s full of national security priorities from Senators across this body on both sides of the aisle.”
NAME GAME.
It should be noted that neither of the defense bills passed by the House or Senate codifies President Trump’s push to change the name of the Department of Defense back to the Department of War.  For now, the ‘War Department’ will remain a nickname only.
QATAR PLANE
.   I should also note one other vote.  Republicans also defeated a plan from Democrats to block money to refurbish a 747 plane that was gifted by leaders of Qatar to President Trump - in order to be used as a future Air Force One.  That vote was 50-46 along party lines, with Republicans opposed.
SHUTDOWN LATEST.
There was no breakthrough again on Thursday over the federal government shutdown, which definitely is going to stretch into next week.  Senate Democrats (plus GOP Sen. Rand Paul) voted yesterday for a seventh time to filibuster a House-passed 7-week temporary funding bill.  The next vote won’t be until Tuesday.
NEXT WEEK.
Why next Tuesday?  Because Senators went home last night for a long Columbus Day holiday weekend.  Yep.  Both houses of Congress are off for days DURING a government shutdown.  The Senate won’t be back for votes until Tuesday, and the House remains out indefinitely.  (Narrator: That’s nuts.)
HALLWAYS.
On one hand, I can understand that decision to leave town.  The hallway interviews with Senators on Thursday were just a repeat of the last week.  There was no evidence of progress.  Republicans say there can’t be negotiations until the government is open.  Democrats say the government shouldn’t reopen until there are negotiations.
IMPASSE.
“The Republicans have flatly refused to come to the table,” said Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-MA), as Democrats tried to more publicly detail the impact of the expiration of subsidies for the Obama health law.
NUMBERS.
“A 60 year old couple in my district will face a nearly 500 percent increase if we do not avert this Republican health care crisis,” said Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D-CT).
BLAME GAME.
Democrats clearly feel like they are in a stronger position on this shutdown than when it started.  That led to a quote from Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer which might have sounded good at first - but was quickly grabbed by the GOP for other purposes.  They put together this handy graphic.
MRS. GREENE OF GEORGIA.
Democrats continued yesterday to get support for their health insurance cause from a most unlikely source - Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene (R-GA).  “I’m getting phone calls from people that are saying if the ACA tax credits expire, they aren’t going to be able to have health insurance,” Greene told CNN yesterday.
LARGER TRUTH.
Greene again criticized her own party leadership, saying they didn’t really have an answer to the subsidy issue.  But the Georgia Republican was really pointing out a larger truth about the GOP: Republicans still don’t have a comprehensive plan to replace the Obama health law.
DEMS.
“Their plan is to nuke Obamacare with no substitute,” said Rep. Darren Soto (D-FL).  “This is an extraordinary health care crisis that even Marjorie Taylor Greene recognizes is a very real real thing for everyday Americans,” said House Democratic Leader Hakeem Jeffries.
NO PLAN.
What do Republicans want to do with America’s health care system?  Can you answer that question?   Probably not.  The GOP talks big about health care - but never comes up with anything that looks like a replacement.
That’s my column this week
for the Atlanta Journal Constitution.
REPEAL AND WHAT.
I want you to think about this situation.   For all of the bellyaching by Republicans over the past 15 years about the Obama health law - the GOP has no comprehensive replacement.  They have various ideas, but no bill that they could put up for a vote in Congress.  And Democrats know it.
NEXT WEEK.
House GOP leaders haven’t made an announcement yet, but Speaker Mike Johnson seems to be ready to keep lawmakers at home for a fourth straight week next week.  The feeling in the hallways of the Capitol is that if the Speaker brings back House Republicans - that might cause more headaches than it’s worth.
MILITARY PAY.
But some Republicans are itching to get back to Capitol Hill in order to put pressure on Democrats about the shutdown.  One idea is to pass a bill which would fund paychecks for members of the armed services.  So far, Speaker Johnson doesn’t want to go down that road.
VOTE.
But rank and file GOP lawmakers want to point the finger at Democrats.  “They have shamefully put funding of our brave troops at risk,” said Rep. Elise Stefanik (R-NY), who called for a vote on the ‘Pay Our Troops Act.’  “Our troops deserve better,” said Rep. Ken Calvert (R-CA).
COME BACK.
Democrats were more than happy to pour some gasoline on this GOP fire, as dozens called for action on pay for soldiers.  “Our nation’s servicemembers will miss a paycheck on Wednesday unless Congress acts,” said Rep. Lori Trahan (D-MA).
C-SPAN.
Thursday brought a unique TV moment.  For the first time in 24 years, a sitting Speaker of the House took phone calls in a live segment on C-SPAN.  It went about how you might imagine, as Speaker Mike Johnson had to sit quietly and stare into the camera while some callers railed against the actions of the Republican Party.
BRIAN LAMB.
“It is a great forum,” the Speaker began, starting out the program with a favorable GOP caller.  “I think you’re doing a great job,” said Peter from New York.  But you knew what was coming sooner or later.
NEXT CALLER.
“As a Republican, I’m very disappointed in my party, and I’m very disappointed in you,”
a woman from Virginia
bluntly told the Speaker.  “You do have the power to call the House back. You refused to do that just for show.”
HEALTH CARE.
Johnson used his appearance to defend GOP claims - which are a bit weak - that Democrats just want to spend more money on health care for illegal immigrants.  “I’m not lying, I’m telling you the truth,” Johnson said of the GOP talking point.  “You can look at the documents.”
GRIJALVA.
In his C-SPAN appearance, the Speaker again repeated his somewhat nonsensical answers about why he has not sworn in the newest member of the House, Rep.-elect Adelita Grijalva (D-AZ).  She won her election in Arizona on September 23 - and is still waiting to take the oath of office.
NOTHING TO SEE HERE.
“This has nothing to do with Epstein,” the Speaker said, though Democrats know that Grijalva will be the 218th signature for a bill which would require the release of more documents about the Jeffrey Epstein sex trafficking investigation.
TODAY.
There is another pro forma session of the House today at 11:30 am.  We’ll see if Democrats make a ruckus on the House floor one more time.  Grijalva’s election should be certified next week.
PRECEDENT.
I want to say something.  Speaker Johnson is playing a very dangerous game with Adelita Grijalva.  If you can intentionally delay the swearing-in of a legitimately elected member of Congress - you are taking the country to a very dark place.  No one should stand for this.
THREE MEN AND A LADY.
I should also note that the last three members of the House to win special elections were white men.  They were sworn into office the very next day - 2 of the GOP lawmakers took that oath when there was no legislative business.  Grijalva deserves the same respect from the Speaker.
SOUNDS OF SILENCE.
With the House on what seems like a permanent GOP vacation, and no public tours being conducted, there isn’t much happening inside the Capitol.  From here in Statuary Hall, Clio the Muse of History, has little to write about these days.  There wasn’t anyone around from here on the House side, through the Rotunda, and over to the Old Senate Chamber.
MUSE OF HISTORY.
October 10, 1881.  The Senate
returned for a special session
on this date, called by President Chester Arthur, after the assassination of President James Garfield.  With no Vice President - there was some question as to who should preside over the evenly divided Senate. “I have been requested by a number of Senators on both sides of the Chamber to call the Senate to order,” said Sen. Isham Harris of Tennessee.
LEGISLATIVE PROGRAM:
The House has no votes scheduled.
The Senate returns on October 14.
Follow me on Twitter
@jamiedupree
. Follow me on
Bluesky
.
Email me at
jamiedupree@substack.com
Tips also welcome on Signal - jamiedupree.64
If you want to say ‘thanks’ -
you can buy me a cup of coffee
.
Give a gift subscription