[H1]Government Can Help Parents Against Big Tech

COMMENTARY Big Tech

[H1]Government Can Help Parents Against Big Tech

Aug 14, 2024 1 min read

Keiko Iwabuchi/Getty Images

[H3]Key Takeaways

Parents like me need help beyond admonitions to be a better parent when facing off against Big Tech companies.

I know because I worked at one.

At issue is that companies are aware of these effects on American youth and yet continue to target them.

If the Kids Online Safety Act passes, the Federal Trade Commission and state AGs wouldn’t be acting in loco parentis, but instead serving as our force multipliers.

Copied

Parents like me need help beyond admonitions to be a better parent when facing off against Big Tech companies.

I know because I worked at one.

As 42 attorneys general allege, these companies deliberately design their products to addict children.

Internal  Facebook  research revealed that Facebook created a team to draw preteens to its platform, citing them as a “valuable but untapped” audience.

Several studies now reify a causal connection to the use of these products and negative effects on kids (“ Congress Tries to Protect Children Online,” Review & Outlook, July 31).

At issue is that companies are aware of these effects on American youth and yet continue to target them.

This deliberate, sustained exploitation of kids crosses the line and invites robust legislative action.

If the Kids Online Safety Act passes the House, the Federal Trade Commission and state AGs wouldn’t be acting  in loco parentis, but instead serving as our force multipliers.

They will be the deterrence and the teeth backing us up against trillions of dollars in market cap.

That, along with expanded technical controls and mandated transparency, is empowering parents like me.

[H2]Heritage Offers

[H4]Activate your 2025 Membership

By activating your membership you'll become part of a committed group of fellow patriots who stand for America's Founding principles.

[H4]The Heritage Guide to the Constitution

Receive a clause-by-clause analysis of the Constitution with input from more than 100 scholars and legal experts.

[H4]American Founders

In this FREE, extensive eBook, you will learn about how our Founders used intellect, prudence, and courage to create the greatest nation in the world.

More on This Issue

[H2]Big Tech

COMMENTARY 3 min read

Good Luck Trying To Leave TikTok

COMMENTARY 3 min read

AI Companions Are Harming Your Children

COMMENTARY 3 min read

A Federalist Approach to AI Policy