Also in today’s edition of ‘Regular Order’ for September 16, 2025:
Mace to target Omar over Kirk comments.
FBI Director to face critics in two days of hearings.
D.C. delegate, 88, faces calls to retire.
TRUMP TARIFFS.
GOP leaders sure don't want the House voting on any plans to repeal President Trump's tariffs.  For a fifth time this year, the House will vote today to prevent any move to repeal Trump's controversial tariffs - using the House rules to block tariff votes until April of 2026.  It means GOP lawmakers could avoid going on the record about tariffs for another six months.
CONGRESS.
Democrats were outraged.  "Americans deserve to know where their representatives stand on tariffs that are damaging our economy," said Rep. Mary Gay Scanlon (D-PA), as Democrats tried to force the GOP to embrace tariffs which have pushed some consumer prices higher.
PRIVILEGED.
Under federal law, Congress is supposed to be able to vote to repeal a national emergency declared by a President - which Trump used to levy tariffs on imports from around the globe.  But the GOP is getting around that by
changing the process
to block any votes.
TEXT.
"The provisions of section 202 of the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1622) shall not apply during the period from September 16, 2025, through March 31, 2026, to a joint resolution terminating the national emergency declared by the President on July 30, 2025," the GOP plan states in part.
BRAZIL.
This parliamentary gambit comes a day after Republicans used a procedural vote to block debate on a plan to repeal Trump's 50 percent tariffs on imports from Brazil.  Two GOP lawmakers, Rep. Don Bacon (R-NE) and Rep. Thomas Massie (R-KY), sided with all Democrats - but the effort narrowly failed on a vote of 200-198.
PARLIAMENTARY NERD NOTE.
If you go looking in the Congressional Record for the earlier House votes related to tariffs, they are not easy to find.  Why?  Because the GOP keeps using highly technical language to block debate, often tucked into a ‘rule’ for floor debate.
MOTION TO TABLE THE MOTION TO DISCHARGE.
Last night, Democrats tried a different tactic to get a vote to repeal the Trump tariffs against Brazil.   That didn’t work either.  Republicans foiled that by moving to table (kill) a motion to  (discharge) force a bill to the floor.
COFFEE TAX.
The focus on tariffs against Brazil is part of an effort by Democrats to remind voters why you are seeing higher prices for coffee
.
"Trump's coffee tax means you pay more," said Rep. Lloyd Doggett (D-TX).  "If it feels like coffee is even more expensive than it usually is, that's because it is," added Sen. Chris Van Hollen (D-MD).
TELL ME ABOUT IT.
Have you seen your coffee prices go up?
Leave a comment
FBI HEARING.
Two days of previously scheduled hearings on Capitol Hill with FBI Director Kash Patel were already going to be politically charged.  But in the wake of last week's killing of a conservative activist - and certain public statements by Patel - critics will have even more to talk about at today's meeting of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
KIRK.
Hours after Charlie Kirk was killed on a Utah college campus, Patel tweeted that 'the subject' was in custody.  There was only one problem.  The shooter had not yet been arrested.
PUBLIC.
"Announcing you have got a suspect in custody when you actually don't - is dramatically troubling," said Rep. Glenn Ivey (D-MD), a former county prosecutor.
COUNTER.
Don't look for Patel to wilt.  And don’t look for Republicans to abandon him today.  "I think he’s got a lot of good things to talk about,” said Sen. Thom Tillis (R-NC), disparaging critics as ‘Monday morning quarterbacks.’
EPSTEIN.
The hearing won't only cover the Kirk shooting.  Look for Democrats to bring up the Epstein Files as well.  Democrats have all but accused Patel of helping with a coverup to protect President Trump, noting Patel’s past statements calling for the release of all documents by the feds.
KIRK.
Vice President JD Vance on Monday lent his voice to a growing GOP chorus to ferret out anyone who might say something mean about Charlie Kirk, the conservative podcaster who was killed by a sniper last week in Utah.  "When you see someone celebrating Charlie's murder, call them out," Vance said.  "Call their employer."
CONGRESS.
We've seen that from a number of Congressional Republicans in recent days, who have used social media posts to demand that people get fired for saying something about Kirk.
YOU’RE FIRED.
"I will make sure that anyone who receives money from the government and celebrates Charlie Kirk’s death will be out of a job," said Rep. Randy Fine (R-FL).
WISCONSIN.
Rep. Derrick Van Orden (R-WI) has been especially vocal, threatening to cut off funding for cities in his own state.  "Federal dollars will not be going to support communities that have hate mongers celebrating the assassination of American citizens," said Van Orden.
SEARCH.
Van Orden cited a social media post by Aaron Brewster, a city council member in Eau Claire, Wisconsin.  In that post, Brewster quoted Kirk.
QUOTE.
What was the quote?  "I think it's worth to have a cost of, unfortunately, some gun deaths every single year so that we can have the Second Amendment to protect our other God-given rights," Kirk said in 2023.
WORDS.
Here is my question for you.  Is it bad form to post that quote?
Leave a comment
MACED.
The desire to punish someone who doesn't smother Kirk in praise certainly extends to Capitol Hill.  Rep. Nancy Mace (R-SC)
announced Monday
that she wants to censure Rep. Ilhan Omar (D-MN) for some of Omar's comments about Kirk, and remove Omar from her House committees.  What did Omar say that angered Mace?
COMMENTS.
Omar said conservatives who blamed liberals for the Kirk shooting were 'full of shit.'  Mace claims Omar said people who said Charlie Kirk wanted to have a civil debate are 'full of shit,' and later described him as a 'reprehensible human being.'
OMAR.
"While I disagreed with Charlie Kirk vehemently about his rhetoric, my heart breaks for his wife and children," Omar tweeted.  "I don’t wish violence on anyone. My faith teaches me the power of peace, empathy, and compassion."
TRUMP.
From the Oval Office, President Trump attacked Omar on Monday as well.  "I think she's a disgraceful person, a loser," Trump told reporters.  "I think she's a disgusting person."
CENSURE.
It won't surprise me if Republicans bring something like this to the floor against Omar, whether she really said anything bad or not.
HONORS.
Republicans fondly remembered Kirk in a U.S. Capitol ceremony last night.  You can also find individual tributes in the halls of Congress, like this poster board outside the office of Rep. Abraham Hamadeh of Arizona.
FUNDING.
Top Republicans said Monday that they plan to pass a temporary funding plan this week, which would keep the government funded until just before Thanksgiving.  But the GOP was slow in releasing the actual text of the plan, which was already generating opposition from some in their own party.
STOPGAP.
"That's Joe Biden's budget," said Rep. Thomas Massie (R-KY), accurately noting that a stopgap plan would continue a budget framework that's been in place since 2023.  "We have had zero meetings about voting on a CR," added Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene (R-GA).
STICK TOGETHER.
At the White House, President Trump was urging his party's lawmakers to vote for the plan - whatever the details.  "Republicans have to stick TOGETHER" Trump wrote on his Truth Social website, blaming Democrats for any shutdown talk.  "FAILURE IS NOT AN OPTION," he added.
SECURITY.
One of the sticking points right now is how much money to devote to extra security funding for lawmakers and other government officials.  It comes as lawmakers in both parties say that threats against them are off the charts.  This was Rep. Nancy Mace (R-SC) talking about carrying a concealed weapon with her.
NATION'S CAPITAL.
After Congress refused to extend the federal crime emergency declared in August for Washington, D.C., President Trump threatened on Monday to invoke his powers again to federalize the D.C. police for a second time.  At issue is the question of illegal immigration in the District of Columbia.
ICE.
In a post on his Truth Social website, Trump raged at Washington Mayor Muriel Bowser, demanding that D.C. police cooperate with ICE to get rid of illegal immigrants.  "If I allowed this to happen, CRIME would come roaring back," Trump wrote.
THURSDAY.
Mayor Bowser goes before the House Oversight Committee on Thursday in what could be a spicy hearing.  The Mayor has aggravated all sides as she tries to plow a furrow down the middle on how best to address crime in the District of Columbia.
D.C. CRIME.
Republicans are bringing a series of bills to the House floor this week which are designed to force changes in how the D.C. city government deals with crime and criminals.  One bill lowers to 14-years-old the age at which a minor can be tried as an adult.
PURSUITS.
Another bill basically mandates that police engage in pursuits of any fleeing motor vehicle.  This is an interesting matter - because D.C. police avoid high-speed chases.  And we had a real-time test of why during the recent crime emergency declared by President Trump.
USPP.
The Park Police - which is responsible for watching stuff like the National Mall and various federal parks - ended their prohibition on police chases during the anti-crime surge.  What happened as a result?  The Washington Post reported that in 10 cases, the chases resulted in six different crashes.
NORTON.
The brouhaha over crime in the District of Columbia has also shined a very unwelcome light on D.C. Delegate Eleanor Holmes Norton.  Once a fiery defender of the city, the 88-year-old Norton has barely participated in the public debate about the President's anti-crime surge.  And it's been noticed.
TIME TO GO.
In a Washington Post op-ed, longtime Democratic Party bigwig Donna Brazile called on Norton to drop her plans to run for reelection in 2026.  "She is no longer the dynamo she once was at a time when D.C. needs the kind of energetic representation in Congress she provided for decades," wrote Brazile.
VETERAN.
Brazile is correct.  Norton is a shell of her former self.  Like many other 80-somethings in Congress, she has stayed too long, and it is impossible for people on Capitol Hill to just ignore it.
TRUMP BANNERS.
Democrats in Congress say the Trump Administration is violating laws on propaganda - and wasting taxpayer dollars - by hanging giant pictures of President Trump on various federal buildings.   You can read their report
at this link
.
REPORT.
"These banners mimic self-aggrandizing banners, billboards, and other propaganda promoted by dictators abroad," said the review, which was done by the office of Sen. Adam Schiff (D-CA).
LABOR.
This banner was put up on the Department of Labor just before Labor Day - and then was taken down.  But now, it has reappeared on the building, which is just down the hill from the U.S. Capitol.
MUSE OF HISTORY.
September 16, 1850.  The Senate
on this date
voted 33-19 to pass a bill to ban slave trading (but not the possession of slaves) in Washington, D.C. - one piece of what we know as the Compromise of 1850.  The final debate was somewhat bitter, as Senators sparred the need for action on slavery. "I represented the opinions of my constituents in opposing these measures," said Sen. Jefferson Davis of Mississippi (yes, THAT Jefferson Davis).
LEGISLATIVE PROGRAM:
The House convenes at 10 am.
The Senate meets at 10 am.
Follow me on Twitter
@jamiedupree
. Follow me on
Bluesky
.
Email me at
jamiedupree@substack.com
Tips also welcome on Signal - jamiedupree.64
If you want to say ‘thanks’ -
you can buy me a cup of coffee
.
Give a gift subscription