[H1]Ivy League Faculties Fail the “Sodom and Gomorrah” Test of Having 10 Righteous Inhabitants

COMMENTARY Education

[H1]Ivy League Faculties Fail the “Sodom and Gomorrah” Test of Having 10 Righteous Inhabitants

Jan 6, 2025 1 min read

Blair Hall at Princeton University.

Loop Images / Universal Images Group / Getty Images

[H3]Key Takeaways

Elite universities have been so thoroughly captured by the left that they are no longer capable of reforming themselves to offer an ideologically balanced education.

Declaring that institutions are beyond repair should not be done lightly.

The point here is not that conservative faculty are the righteous ones, but that a critical mass of conservative professors is necessary to achieve internal reform.

Copied

Elite universities have been so thoroughly captured by the left that they are no longer capable of reforming themselves to offer an ideologically balanced and intellectually diverse education.

Declaring that institutions are beyond repair should not be done lightly.

The Bible offers an instructive lesson on this.

Before judging the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, Abraham bargains with God so that the cities would be spared if even 10 righteous people could be found there.

If there are fewer than 10, the cities lack the critical mass required for making improvements.

Let’s apply the Sodom and Gomorrah test to the Ivy League.

If we can find even 10 openly conservative professors at these universities, it might be possible for them to form a critical mass and make progress in getting their institutions to hire other conservative scholars to achieve meaningful ideological balance.

Without even 10, these universities would not only lack the motivation to seek greater ideological diversity, but they would have great difficulty identifying quality conservative scholars and convincing them to join an organization without any like-minded colleagues.

The point here is not that conservative faculty are the righteous ones, but that a critical mass of conservative professors is necessary to achieve internal reform.....

This piece originally appeared in The Federalist.

You can find the rest of the piece here.

[H2]Heritage Offers

[H4]Activate your 2025 Membership

By activating your membership you'll become part of a committed group of fellow patriots who stand for America's Founding principles.

[H4]The Heritage Guide to the Constitution

Receive a clause-by-clause analysis of the Constitution with input from more than 100 scholars and legal experts.

[H4]American Founders

In this FREE, extensive eBook, you will learn about how our Founders used intellect, prudence, and courage to create the greatest nation in the world.

More on This Issue

[H2]Education

BACKGROUNDER 19 min read

Rightly Rated: New Survey Affirms Colleges Promoting Virtue and Tolerance

COMMENTARY 3 min read

School Choice, Not Test Scores, Produces Real Accountability

COMMENTARY 3 min read

Linda McMahon Shows How To Take On the Deep State