[H1]Model State Statute: Barring Funding for Lawyers Who Represent Illegal Aliens

Apr 7th, 2025 1 min read

Copied

SECTION 1.

DEFINITIONS.
(a) STATE CONTRACT. ‘‘State contract” means any contract entered into by the state of [X] including any contract to which any agency, department, or political subdivision of the state of [X] becomes a party.
(b) ORGANIZATION. “Organization” should be interpreted consistent with its definition in Section 101(a)(28) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.

Code §1101).
(c) UNLAWFUL PRESENCE. “Unlawfully present” alien in the United States is an alien as defined in 8 U.S.

Code § 1101 (a)(3) who does not have a lawful immigration status under the immigration laws of the United States.

Lawful immigration status does not include parole under 8 U.S.

Code § 1182(d)(5).
(d) LEGAL ORIENTATION SERVICES. “Legal orientation services” should be interpreted consistent with its definition in section 235(c)(4) of the William Wilberforce Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008 (8 U.S.

Code § 1232(c)(4).

SECTION 2.

STATE FUNDING LIMITATIONS.
(a) IN GENERAL.

No state funds received pursuant to a state contract, grant, loan, or any other agreement may be issued to any organization or individual that provides legal representation or legal orientation services for aliens unlawfully present in the United States.
(b) OTHER RECIPIENTS.

No agency, department, county, city, unit of local government, or political subdivision of this state may use or allocate any funds, or provide any other form of assistance, to any legal defense fund for the representation of aliens unlawfully present in the United States.

SECTION 3.

ENFORCEMENT.
(a) Every organization or individual that applies for a state contract, grant, loan, or any other agreement must include, along with other required documentation, a signed affidavit affirming that no funds issued by the state will be used to provide legal representation or legal orientation services for aliens unlawfully present in the United States.
(b) Upon a finding of violation of Section 2, the [state] Attorney General shall cancel all current contracts, grants, loans, or other agreements the recipient organization or individual was issued by the state of [X] and revoke any state-issued licenses the organization or individual has been awarded for a duration of six months and issue a fine of $1,000 (one thousand dollars) to the organization or individual for every violation of Section 2.

The organization or individual shall also reimburse the state for all payments and funds received under the cancelled contract, grant, loan, or other agreement.
(c) Every unlawfully present alien aided in violation of Section 2 by an organization or individual shall constitute a separate violation.