[H1]Politicians Use Inflation To Target American Way of Life

COMMENTARY Budget and Spending

[H1]Politicians Use Inflation To Target American Way of Life

Jan 6, 2025 2 min read

Commentary By

Richard Stern

Acting Director, Roe Institute and Director, Hermann Center

Brooks Newby

Fall 2024 Member of the Young Leaders Program at The Heritage Foundation

Don’t blame greed—blame the politicians who control the money supply.

Dragon Claws / Getty Images

[H3]Key Takeaways

Ron Paul called inflation a “hidden tax” on Americans.

Today, politicians use it as a weapon to destroy the American way of life.

In 2020, when the recession occurred, the Fed flooded markets with $4 trillion that had been created to finance a massive increase in government spending.

We must cut reckless government spending and prevent politicians from abusing the dollar to finance their goals at your expense.

Copied

“Inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon,” Milton Friedman once said.

In other words, don’t blame greed—blame the politicians who control the money supply.

Ron Paul called inflation a “hidden tax” on Americans.

Today, politicians use it as a weapon to destroy the American way of life.

The last four years have seen a dramatic 20% price increase for most Americans—adding over $20,000 to the annual cost of living for a typical family of four.

This is no accident.

It’s a malicious implementation by Washington politicians of the left-wing policy known as Modern Monetary Theory, or MMT.

This is the theory that our government can print as much money as needed to finance its spending—in effect, using inflation as a backdoor form of taxation.

This is a tax that no one voted for and is outside of the control of Congress—the elected representatives of the people.

Instead of maintaining the dollar to preserve the value of your hard work, MMT turns the dollar against Americans.
>>>  Biden Oblivious About Leaving Trump an Economy on the Precipice of Disaster
MMT has converted the Federal Reserve into a massive instrument of wealth redistribution—from hardworking Americans to those favored by the federal government.

By the end of the pandemic, “650 billionaires in America saw their net worth increase by more than $1 trillion,” according to Forbes.

While politicians shut your life down and made it illegal to celebrate Independence Day, they managed to give some of the richest of the rich trillions of dollars in net worth.

The problem is not that these people are billionaires.

The problem is increasingly how wealth is acquired in the U.S.

In a free market, profit naturally follows innovation and work to improve the quality of life for all.

But people should not become rich through government’s redistribution of wealth by devaluing the dollar.

In 2020, when the recession occurred, the Fed flooded markets with $4 trillion that had been created out of thin air to finance a massive increase in government spending.

Many economists tried to tell everyone that this wouldn’t cause inflation, which would be laughable if not for the economic tragedy that ensued.

This, of course, created the classic recipe for inflation—more dollars chasing fewer goods and services.

Government lockdowns created the “fewer goods and services” while the Fed saw to the more dollars.

This is just the most recent example of the government using MMT to print money for its schemes at the expense of your livelihood.

With inflation back over 3% and the Fed beginning to cut rates again to increase the money supply, inflation is sure to follow.

The pressure now is not just from COVID-19 spending.

It comes from the weight of the $36 trillion national debt—well over $100,000 per American.

This is what decades of reckless government spending have done to our economy and nation.
>>>  Why Are Americans Still Feeling the Economic Squeeze?

In just the last four years of MMT, we’ve seen the worst inflation in 40 years and 20-year highs for interest rates, including mortgage rates that have tripled since President Biden took office.

This has devastated the household finances of most Americans.

No matter what the alleged experts claim, a government cannot simply run deficits and turn to the money printer to run indefinitely.

History has shown us what a disaster that is.

The Weimar Republic, the Roman Empire and many other countries drowned under just such a devaluation of their currency and the resulting hyperinflation.

To avoid their fates, we must cut reckless government spending and prevent politicians from abusing the dollar to finance their goals at your expense.

Put simply, the American dream cannot coexist alongside a government with the ability to weaponize inflation against its own people.

[H2]Heritage Offers

[H4]Activate your 2025 Membership

By activating your membership you'll become part of a committed group of fellow patriots who stand for America's Founding principles.

[H4]The Heritage Guide to the Constitution

Receive a clause-by-clause analysis of the Constitution with input from more than 100 scholars and legal experts.

[H4]American Founders

In this FREE, extensive eBook, you will learn about how our Founders used intellect, prudence, and courage to create the greatest nation in the world.

More on This Issue

[H2]Budget and Spending

FACTSHEET 2 min read

Democrats Shut Down Government Over Health Care for Illegal Aliens

COMMENTARY 3 min read

The Army Is Dangerously Low on One Key Weapon in the Pacific

COMMENTARY 4 min read

My Wife Lost Her Job in the DOGE Cuts.

I Still Think They Were Justified