On  June 21, the United States bombed three Iranian nuclear facilities, marking its entry into the war that Israel had launched the previous week when it struck military and nuclear targets in Iran.

The 12-day exchange of Israeli, Iranian, and American strikes marked a dramatic widening and intensification of the conflicts that have roiled the Middle East for the last year and a half.

This timeline tracks the events that led to this war, including attempts at U.S.-Iranian nuclear diplomacy, the ongoing Israeli campaign in Gaza, and the conflicts between Israel, Hezbollah, and other Iran-backed groups in the region, among other developments.

Nuclear diplomacy with Iran

[H2]2013-2018

[H3]2013

November 24 JPOA signed.

Iran and the P5+1 (referring to the five permanent members of the U.

N.

Security Council—China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States—and Germany) sign the Joint Plan of Action in Geneva.

This six-month agreement comes after extensive negotiations, layout out steps for each side in the first phase of a deal and setting the stage for negotiations to reach a comprehensive nuclear agreement.

[H3]2014

February 17 Talks begin in Vienna.

Iran and the P5+1 countries meet in Vienna for the first of many rounds of negotiations on a comprehensive nuclear agreement.

[H3]2015

March 3 Benjamin Netanyahu speaks before Congress.

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu speaks before a joint session of the U.S.

Congress in opposition to the ongoing negotiations with Iran.

July 14

[H3]July 14

JCPOA signed.

Iran and the P5+1 negotiators announce they have agreed to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), an agreement by which Iran agrees to limits on its nuclear program in exchange for sanctions relief.

October 18 JCPOA formally adopted.

Iran and the P5+1 formally adopt the nuclear deal following its review by the U.S.

Congress and Iran’s parliament and Guardian Council.

[H3]2016

January 16 Implementation day.

The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) verifies Tehran has met its commitments under the nuclear deal, triggering the lifting of U.

N. sanctions on Iran.

[H3]2017

January 20 Donald Trump is inaugurated.

President Donald Trump, a long-time critic of nuclear diplomacy with Iran, takes office in the White House for the first time.

[H3]2018

January 31 Israel covertly steals Iranian nuclear archive.

Israeli Mossad agents break into an Iranian facility and steal archived papers documenting plans for nuclear weapons production.

The revelation of the papers is said to have influenced Trump’s decision to withdraw from the Iran deal.

May 8

[H3]May 8

Trump withdraws from JCPOA.

Trump announces that he is withdrawing the United States from the deal.

He signs a memorandum to institute the “highest level” of sanctions on Iran.

“Maximum pressure”

[H2]2019-2021

[H3]2019

June 13 Shinzo Abe meets Ali Khamanei.

In an effort to mediate growing tensions between Iran and the United States and resume Japanese oil imports from Iran, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe meets with Iranian President Hassan Rouhani and Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei, who express no desire to negotiate nuclear terms with Trump.

July 1 Iran surpasses uranium stockpile limit.

Iran declares its breach of the 300-kilogram 3.67% enriched uranium stockpile limit outlined by the JCPOA.

September 14

[H3]September 14

Abqaiq attacked.

Adrone attack on Saudi Arabian oil processing facilities at Abqaiq and Khurais temporarily disrupts about half of the kingdom’s oil supply.

U.S. and Saudi officials hold Iran responsible for the attack.

November Iran begins uranium enrichment at Fordow.

Iran installs centrifuges and transfers material to begin uranium enrichment at the Fordow nuclear facility, inciting warnings and criticism from the U.K., Germany, France, and the United States.

December 27 Iran-backed militia’s rocket attack kills U.S. contractor in Iraq.

Rockets launched by an Iranian-backed militia in Iraq wound several American troops and kill one American contractor at a military base near Kirkuk.

[H3]2020

January 3 United States assassinates Qassim Soleimani.

Iranian General Qassim Soleimani, commander of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps Quds Force, is assassinated by a U.S. drone strike in Baghdad.

January 8 Iran retaliates.

In response to the assassination of Soleimani, Iran launches ballistic missiles targeting U.S. airbases in Iraq.

Amid these strikes, Iran accidentally hits a passenger plane, killing 176 people on board.

November 27 Israel assassinates Mohsen Fakhrizadeh.

Iran’s chief nuclear scientist is killed in northern Iran.

[H3]2021

January 20

[H3]January 20

Joe Biden is inaugurated.

President Joe Biden takes office and in early months attempts to revive nuclear diplomacy with Iran.

December Installation of IR-6 centrifuges at Fordow.

Iran begins utilizing IR-6 centrifuges at its Fordow nuclear facility.

The centrifuges are known for their efficiency in enriching uranium for weapons-grade use.

War breaks out between Israel and Hamas

[H2]2023-2024

[H3]2023

September 18 American hostages released and Iranian assets unfrozen.

In an attempt to de-escalate tensions, Iran and the United States agree to an exchange of Americans held hostage in Iran and Iranians held in the United States.

The Biden administration unfreezes $6 billion in Iranian oil assets.

October 7

[H3]October 7

Hamas attacks Israel.

Hamas attacks southern Israel, killing over 1,100 people and taking hundreds more hostage; Israel begins an air campaign in Gaza.

October 8 Hezbollah begins firing rockets.

Hezbollah begins to fire rockets from Lebanon into Israel.

Israel begins artillery fire into Lebanon.

October 18 JCPOA Transition Day.

As per the terms of the nuclear deal, “transition day” would mark the lifting of certain European Union sanctions on Iran.

However, the U.K., France, and Germany decide to retain sanctions due to Iran’s expansion of uranium enrichment and failure to adhere to its JCPOA commitments.

October 19 Houthis join fighting.

The Houthis, a Yemeni militant group aligned with Iran, begin firing rockets and drones at Israeli ships in the Red Sea; their attacks eventually expand to other international shipping.

October 27 Israel invades Gaza.

Israeli ground invasion of Gaza begins.

November 24-30 Brief Gaza truce.

Israel-Hamas truce; the sides exchange Israeli hostages for Palestinian prisoners.

Fighting soon resumes in Gaza, where a humanitarian crisis deepens.

[H3]2024

January Strikes against Houthis.

The United States and the U.K. launch strikes against the Houthis in response to attacks on shipping vessels in the Red Sea.

April 1 Israel and Iran exchange air and missile strikes for the first time.

Israel strikes the Iranian consulate in Damascus, Syria, killing senior Iranian generals and provoking retaliation from the Islamic Republic, which fires missiles and drones at Israel.

This exchange brings the long-running shadow conflict between the two countries into the open.

July 31 Ismail Haniyeh is assassinated.

Israel assassinates Hamas political leader Ismail Haniyeh while he is staying in a guesthouse run by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps in Tehran.

War between Israel and Hezbollah escalates

[H2]September-December 2024

September 23 Israeli strikes against Hezbollah.

Israel launches massive airstrikes against Hezbollah in Lebanon.

September 27 Death of Hassan Nasrallah.

Israel assassinates long-time Hezbollah leader, Hassan Nasrallah, in Beirut.

October 1

[H3]October 1

Israel invades Lebanon; Iran launches missile barrage against Israel.

Israeli ground incursion targets Hezbollah militants and infrastructure.

Iran then launches ballistic missiles aimed at Israel, causing limited damage.

October 17 Israel kills Yahya Sinwar.

Yahya Sinwar, leader of Hamas and the mastermind of October 7, is killed by Israeli forces in southern Gaza.

October 26 Israel strikes Iran.

November 27 Israel and Hezbollah agree to a ceasefire.

Israel and Hezbollah reach a ceasefire deal to end the fighting and begin the withdrawal of Israel Defense Forces troops and Hezbollah fighters from the border of Israel and Lebanon.

December 8 Bashar al-Assad falls.

The long-time Syrian president flees Damascus as rebels, led by the militant Islamist group Hayat Tahrir al-Sham, take power; Israeli troops enter southern Syria, occupying positions along the Israeli-Syrian buffer zone as Israeli airstrikes begin targeting Syrian anti-aircraft and other military equipment across the country.

Apause in fighting in Gaza

[H2]January 2025

January 19 Israel-Hamas temporary ceasefire takes effect.

Israel and Hamas reach a ceasefire agreement; the initial stage involves the exchange of Israeli hostages held by Hamas for Palestinian prisoners by Israel and the surge of aid into Gaza.

January 20

[H3]January 20

Trump returns to office in Washington.

After winning the November 2024 presidential election, Trump again takes office in the White House.

January 29 Ahmed al-Sharaa appointed president of Syria.

The rebel leader formerly known by his nom de guerre, Abu Mohammed al-Jolani, is appointed president of Syria, formalizing his place as the country’s leader.

Attempts at reviving nuclear diplomacy

[H2]March-May 2025

March 18 Israel breaks ceasefire.

The Israeli military resumes airstrikes and begins a months-long blockade of food and other essentials.

April 12

[H3]April 12

Nuclear negotiators meet in Oman.

The United States and Iran begin indirect nuclear negotiations in Oman, led by U.S.

Special Envoy to the Middle East Steve Witkoff and Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi.

May 22 Rome nuclear talks.

American-Iranian nuclear negotiations continue in Rome.

Israeli-Iranian war begins

[H2]June 2025-present

June 13 War breaks out.

Israeli airstrikes target Iranian nuclear and military sites while assassinating several high-level security officials; U.S.-Iran negotiations are suspended.

June 14

[H3]June 14

Iran responds.

Iran launches the first of many retaliatory ballistic missile strikes at Israeli cities amid ongoing Israeli airstrikes in Iran.

June 21 United States bombs Iran.

The United States strikes three Iranian nuclear facilities—Natanz, Isfahan, and Fordow.

The heavily fortified Fordow facility is vulnerable only to U.S. bunker-busting munitions, prompting Israeli leaders to seek U.S. military participation in its bombing campaign.

June 23 Iran retaliates; Trump announces ceasefire.

Iran fires missiles at a U.S. airbase, Al-Udeid, in Qatar.

Trump announces a ceasefire between Iran and Israel.

The Brookings Institution is committed to quality, independence, and impact.

We are supported by a diverse array of funders.

In line with our values and policies, each Brookings publication represents the sole views of its author(s).