Editor's note:
Joe Biden’s tenure in the White House has ended, this page will no longer be updated.

It will remain in its current state as a resource for historical data.

The rate of turnover among senior-level executive branch staff can have a serious impact on the day-to-day performance of the White House—and shape the very nature of a presidency.

As Brookings did for Donald Trump, the Institution is now monitoring staffing changes among the upper echelons of President Biden’s administration.

Below, we offer two sets of resources to help measure and contextualize this turnover.

The first set of resources, immediately below, tracks turnover among senior-ranking advisers in the executive office of the president (which does not include Cabinet secretaries); the second set of resources tracks turnover in the Cabinet.

Back to top

A-Team Turnover

[H2]Turnover on President Biden's "A-Team"

President Biden’s “A-Team” turnover is 72% as of February 15, 2024.

The following chart and table reflect turnover among the most influential positions within the executive office of the president.

This data is compiled and tracked by Brookings nonresident senior fellow Kathryn Dunn Tenpas, who refers to this group of advisers as the president’s “A-Team.” The list of positions that make up the “A-Team” is based on National Journal “Decision Makers” editions, and Tenpas’s methodology is described in detail in a related piece published in January 2022.

The chart and table below will be updated as additional members of the “A-Team” depart their positions.

It is important to note the following:

Because the “A-Team” is made up of members of the executive office of the president, it does not include Cabinet secretaries.

Information on the Cabinet is available below.

Each position on the “A-Team” is only counted once.

If multiple people hold and depart from the same position, only the initial departure is tracked/affects the turnover rate.

The count for turnover among Joe Biden’s administration is ongoing.

Back to top

Cabinet Turnover

[H2]Turnover within President Biden’s Cabinet

President Biden’s Cabinet turnover is 13% as of March 18, 2024.

The chart and table below are dedicated to tracking turnover in the Cabinet.

They will be updated as additional turnover occurs.

Unlike the trackers above dedicated to the president’s “A-Team,” these resources look at every departure from the president’s Cabinet, even if multiple people have occupied the same position.

To understand Tenpas’s definition of Cabinet membership, please read “Who is in the president’s Cabinet?”

[H3]Summary of Cabinet departures in the Biden administration

Set out below is a list of departures from the president’s Cabinet since the beginning of the Biden administration.

The Brookings Institution is committed to quality, independence, and impact.

We are supported by a diverse array of funders.

In line with our values and policies, each Brookings publication represents the sole views of its author(s).