Also in today’s edition of ‘Regular Order’ for October 7, 2025:
Government shutdown rolls into Day 7.
FBI sheds light on Jan. 6 investigation.
Texas GOP Senate races gets more crowded.
PORTLAND.
Aggravated
by a federal court ruling which blocked
the deployment of National Guard soldiers to Portland, Oregon, President Trump on Monday threatened to invoke the Insurrection Act in order to send in U.S. military troops to cities run by Democrats.  “We have an Insurrection Act for a reason,” Trump told reporters, as he called Portland a ‘burning hell hole.’
INJUNCTION.
Trump criticized federal judge Karin Immergut - whom he nominated to the bench - for blocking the deployment of National Guard troops in Portland.  “You have a judge that lost her way, that tries to pretend that like there’s no problem,” Trump said.  “The problem is crime.”
ON THE GROUND.
Oregon Democrats have bitterly denounced Trump’s claims about Portland,
saying the President is lying
.  “Donald Trump and Stephen Miller want you to believe Portland is a nighttime war zone,” said Sen. Ron Wyden (D-OR).  “Don’t fall for it.”
WINDY CITY.
Trump’s Insurrection Act threat came as Democrats in Illinois accused the President of trying to provoke violence with immigration raids in Chicago.  “Donald Trump is pushing the boundaries and daring to believe that the courts, the law, the Constitution no longer matters,” said Rep. Chuy Garcia (D-IL).  “History will remember where we stood in this moment.”
CHICAGO.
Trump blasted the Mayor of Chicago and the Governor of Illinois again on Monday over crime.  “They don’t seem to care about it,” Trump said to reporters in the Oval Office.  “They don’t have it under control.”
GOVERNOR.
Illinois Gov. J.B. Pritzker filed a lawsuit to block the deployment of National Guard soldiers.  “There is no insurrection here,” Pritzker said.  “Donald Trump is using our service members as political props.”
DEMS.
In Congress, Democrats appealed to Republicans to rein in Trump - worried that he will soon ignore the courts and send troops into Chicago and other cities.  “This is a dangerous moment,” said Rep. Jason Crow (D-CO), a former Army Ranger.
CITIES.
Democrats also expressed concern about Trump’s call to use big cities as ‘training grounds’ for the U.S. military.  “Deploying the National Guard to Democratic cities isn’t law enforcement, it’s an authoritarian abuse of power,” said Rep. Judy Chu (D-CA).
BONDI.
If you are looking for a lively hearing to watch today, then tune into the Senate Judiciary Committee at 9 am.  There is no shortage of issues that could cause some uncomfortable moments for Attorney General Pam Bondi, who appears for a scheduled oversight hearing.
SUBJECTS.
It’s not hard to come up with a lengthy list of politically charged matters for Bondi at this hearing:
The use of National Guard troops by Trump.
The Jeffrey Epstein investigation and Trump.
The indictment of former FBI Director James Comey.
Trump’s demand to prosecute enemies like Sen. Adam Schiff (D-CA).
Questions about border czar Tom Homan taking a $50,000 bribe.
GOP.
One thing that I’ll be watching for today is whether any GOP Senators decide to take a swipe at Bondi over the Epstein Files.  Remember, she talked about how she had the Epstein client list ‘sitting on my desk right now.’  But somehow that faded away.
GRIJALVA.
Speaking of the Epstein Files, it was two weeks ago today that Democrat Adelita Grijalva easily won a special election for a U.S. House seat from Arizona.  House Republicans could have sworn her into office, but they have refused.  One House Democrat said Monday that it was nothing more than an ‘Epstein cover up.’
EPSTEIN.
Grijalva would be the 218th signature on a special discharge petition - that would soon enough force action in the House related to a bill which calls for the release of more documents in the Jeffrey Epstein sex trafficking case.
FILES.
“My constituents want me to get to work but House Republicans are more concerned about protecting the Epstein Files,” Grijalva said on Monday.  One GOP critic of Speaker Mike Johnson says this is all about Epstein.
BLUEGRASS.
“Speaker Johnson is doing everything he can, including delaying the swearing in of the most recently elected member of Congress and spreading misinformation about the legislation, to block a vote in Congress on legislation to release the Epstein files,” said Rep. Thomas Massie (R-KY).
PRESSURE.
I have to say that I’m sort of surprised that Democrats haven’t made this more of an issue.  There have been plenty of chances in recent days for Grijalva to make a big splash.  Let me float a few that came to mind.
HOUSE CHAMBER.
Democrats could bring Grijalva on the House floor during one of these pro forma sessions - to demand that she be sworn in.  She is the Representative-elect from Arizona’s 7th District.
Rule IV clearly states
that ‘Members-elect’ are allowed on the House floor.
RAYBURN ROOM.
Democrats could try other tactics.  For example, when Speaker Johnson was holding a news conference on Monday - in the room where ceremonial swearing-in ceremonies are held - Grijalva could have walked in with a Bible, and said, ‘How about right now, Mr. Speaker?’
CONFRONTATION.
Those may seem like ‘in your face’ kind of actions - but a lot of readers who are Democrats keep telling me that what is happening right now is not normal.  And yet the actions of House Democrats don’t really treat this as something out of the ordinary.
APRIL
.  Remember, Speaker Johnson quickly gave the oath to two Florida Republicans - during a pro forma session - back on April 2, one day after their special elections.  Adelita Grijalva has now been waiting for 2 weeks.  That’s really bad form - and everyone knows it.
PARLIAMENTARY NERD NOTE.
While Grijalva’s election has not yet been certified, there is no dispute about her victory.  And many members
have been sworn in
under such circumstances.  But not this time.
SHUTDOWN.
The government shutdown enters its seventh day today.  The Senate failed again on Monday - for a fifth time - to break a filibuster led by Democrats against a House-passed temporary funding plan.  Sen. Rand Paul (R-KY) was again the only Republican Senator to join with Democrats.
TALKS.
In the hallways of the Capitol on Monday, there was absolutely no sense that a deal was in the works.  “There have been conversations,” said Sen. Susan Collins (R-ME).  “I think there are things that could be done, but first we’ve got to reopen government.”
HEALTH CARE.
Collins said she is open to the idea of extending the expiring health insurance subsidies in the Obama health law exchanges.  The Maine Republican says she wants to limit eligibility to incomes under $200,000 per year.
TRUMP.
At the White House, President Trump said he would be open to compromise.  “If we made the right deal, I’d make a deal,” Trump said.  But there were signs of discontent in some GOP quarters about that idea.
FREEDOM CAUCUS.
“Hold the line,” said Rep. Keith Self (R-TX), arguing against any extension of the ACA subsidies.  “This is no time to go wobbly on Obamacare,” added Rep. Chip Roy (R-TX).
REOPEN IT FIRST.
“I am happy to work with the Democrats on their Failed Healthcare Policies,” Trump wrote last night on his Truth Social website.  “But first they must allow our Government to re-open.  In fact, they should open our Government tonight!”
MRS. GREENE OF GEORGIA.
I didn’t see this coming, but Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene (R-GA) is basically siding with Democrats on the issue of extending the Obama health law subsidies.  Why?  Because their expiration will mean big increases in health insurance premiums for millions of Americans.
TWEET.
“I’m going to go against everyone on this issue because when the tax credits expire this year my own adult children’s insurance premiums for 2026 are going to DOUBLE, along with all the wonderful families and hard-working people in my district,” Greene tweeted last night.
LEADERSHIP.
“I’m absolutely disgusted that health insurance premiums will DOUBLE if the tax credits expire this year,” Greene added.  “Not a single Republican in leadership talked to us about this or has given us a plan to help Americans deal with their health insurance premiums DOUBLING!!!”
MESSAGE.
What does this tell me?  Greene isn’t the only GOP lawmaker who is going to hear stories of big increases in health insurance costs for the folks back home.  If Greene is talking like this - why would Democrats back off their push to extend the subsidies?
Leave a comment
CLOSED CAPITOL.
The U.S. Capitol remains closed to visitors because of the shutdown, unless you can get a member of Congress to give you a tour.  The big Capitol Visitor’s Center is empty.  It seems dumb that no one can enjoy the exhibits, the gift shop, the restaurant, and more.  Like I always say, shutdowns are dumb.
SHUTDOWN TOURISM
.  Still using money left over from last year, the Smithsonian museums remain open to tourists this week in Washington, D.C.  But the clock is ticking.  “If the government shutdown continues past October 11, the Smithsonian will then close to the public,” the Smithsonian stated over the weekend.
JAN 6.
GOP Senators and the FBI released information yesterday which shows us some of the background into the Jan. 6 investigation - and how it focused on some Republicans in Congress.  A federal grand jury was evidently so interested in the actions of those lawmakers that it got a subpoena for metadata phone records of 8 Senators and 1 GOP House member.
PROBE.
Republicans were furious about the revelation.  “This document shows the Biden FBI spied on 8 of my Republican Senate colleagues,” thundered Sen. Chuck Grassley (R-IA), who characterized it as an investigation gone wild.  “Anyone and everyone who violated the law must be prosecuted,” said Sen. Josh Hawley (R-MO).
PHONE DATA.
But let’s slow down for one second here.  Just to be clear - this wasn’t about tapping the phone lines of GOP lawmakers, as Hawley alleged.  This involved metadata about dates and times of phone calls.
ROLL CALL.
The eight GOP Senators listed as getting ‘preliminary toll analysis’ of their phone calls were Lindsey Graham (SC), Bill Hagerty (TN), Josh Hawley (MO), Dan Sullivan (AK), Tommy Tuberville (AL), Ron Johnson (WI), Cynthia Lummis (WY), and Marsha Blackburn (TN).
ROLE.
I know why Sen. Ron Johnson (R-WI) is listed.  He tried to help
get fake elector documents
to Vice President Pence on Jan. 6.  That involved a document handoff
outside the U.S. Supreme Court
.
KEYSTONE.
The FBI document names one GOP Congressman, Rep. Mike Kelly (R-PA).  The Jan. 6 security tapes show staffers from Kelly’s office working with Trump allies in
that fake elector scheme
.  Some of you might remember what I found in the
Jan. 6 security tapes
.
TEXAS SENATE.
The GOP race for Senate in Texas just got a bit more complicated for Republicans, as Rep. Wesley Hunt (R-TX) has jumped in the race against Sen. John Cornyn (R-TX) and state Attorney General Ken Paxton.  “Wesley Hunt is an America First fighter,” Hunt’s first appeal read, showing him with President Trump (who has not endorsed anyone).
GOP DIVIDE.
The race between Cornyn and Paxton was already causing divisions among Texas Republicans.  But recent polls have suggested that Paxton has slipped after revelations about his extramarital affairs (plural).
MAGA.
Cornyn is no MAGA warrior.  But he is a strong incumbent.  Can Hunt really mount a serious challenge to Cornyn?  Or is Hunt just going to divide the anti-Cornyn vote with Paxton - and deliver a primary victory to Cornyn?
NUMBERS.
Hunt is yet another example of a House Republican who has decided to run for another office.  17 GOP lawmakers are doing that to just 5 Democrats.  That tells me a lot of people feel like they’re going nowhere fast.
TURNOVER.
So far, 29 House members won’t be back after the 2026 elections.  That’s a 7 percent change.  Senate turnover is currently at 8 seats.  The average over the past 20 years is 61 House seats (14 percent) and 10 Senate seats.
NASA.
Bill Nye the Science Guy was on Capitol Hill yesterday, joining members of Congress to object to proposed White House budget cuts at NASA and the National Science Foundation.  “Science is a bargain,” Nye said at a news conference outside the Capitol.  “For every dollar spent, at least three come back into the economy.”
SCIENCE.
“This is a critical moment for the United States when it comes to science and NASA in particular,” said Rep. Glenn Ivey (D-MD).  “As Bill pointed out, we’re falling behind with respect to China.”
BUDGET.
The White House proposed a nearly 48 percent cut in science programs at NASA.  Congress will likely ignore a big chunk of that - but GOP anger at climate change research may result in cuts.
MONEY.
I’ve told you before how I have always felt that Congress routinely underfunded important items like the National Park Service and the National Weather Service.  Put NASA in that same bucket.  I’ve never understood the reluctance to shift more money into science and space exploration.
MUSE OF HISTORY.
October 7, 1893.  Four months after a building collapse at Ford’s Theater killed 22 government workers, Democrats pressed for further investigation.  Sen. Isham Harris of Tennessee
unveiled a resolution
on this date asking for a select committee to consider whether the feds ‘should compensate the sufferers of that disaster.’
LEGISLATIVE PROGRAM:
The House will not have votes before October 14.
The Senate convenes at 10 am.
Follow me on Twitter
@jamiedupree
. Follow me on
Bluesky
.
Email me at
jamiedupree@substack.com
Tips also welcome on Signal - jamiedupree.64
If you want to say ‘thanks’ -
you can buy me a cup of coffee
.
Give a gift subscription